Introduce configurable timeouts for message handlers. (#3272)
AxonFramework/AxonFramework: docs/old-reference-guide/modules/messaging-concepts/pages/timeouts.adoc

= Timeouts

Axon Framework is built around the asynchronous processing of messages.
In order to prevent a message from being processed indefinitely, Axon provides a mechanism to set a timeout on the invocation of a message handler, or on the processing of the `UnitOfWork` as a whole.

== Overview

Both timeouts work with a limit of the execution time (`timeoutMs`), and a time from which warnings will be logged (`warningThreshold`).
When having a long-running handler or transaction, the following will happen:

. After the `warningThreshold` has passed, a warning will be logged.
. For each `warningInterval` that passes after the `warningThreshold`, another warning will be logged.
. When the `timeoutMs` has passed, the handler or transaction will be interrupted.

Both warnings and timeouts are logged at the `WARN` level.
The message will contain:

. The name of the handler with the message, or component of transaction
. The time it has been processing so far
. The time it has left before the timeout is reached
. The stack trace of the handler or transaction, starting from where the timeout started

For example, a warning message could look like this:

[source,text]
----

> 2025-02-12T20:01:20.795Z  WARN 68040 --- [playground-correlation] [ axon-janitor-0] axon-janitor                             : Message [io.axoniq.playground.publisher.MyContinuousEvent] for handler [io.axoniq.playground.publisher.PersistentStreamEventProcessor] is taking long time to process. Current time: [5000ms]. Will be interrupted in [5000ms].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2025-02-12T20:01:20.795Z  WARN 68040 --- [playground-correlation] [ axon-janitor-0] axon-janitor                             : Message [io.axoniq.playground.publisher.MyContinuousEvent] for handler [io.axoniq.playground.publisher.PersistentStreamEventProcessor] is taking a long time to process. Current time: [5000ms]. Will be interrupted in [5000ms].
```

Author: Well, wasn't a typo in the docs but a typo in all log statements. Corrected! Nice catch

Examples of this are http libraries awaiting a response, that never comes during an event handler.

=== Defaults and disabling

As timeouts and warnings have been introduced in a minor version (4.11), the default values have been set to a high value to not interfere with any processes that users have already built.

Long-running handlers or transactions will start logging warnings after 10 seconds, and will be interrupted after 30 seconds.
You can always change these settings to your liking, or disable the warnings completely as below.
Note that this also disables the annotation-based timeouts.

[tabs]
======
Spring Boot::
+
--
For Spring Boot, disabling all timeouts and warnings can be done by setting the following property in your `application.properties` or `application.yml`:

[source,properties]
----
axon.timeout.enabled=false
----

--

Axon Configuration::
+
--
To disable timeouts and warnings for non-Spring Boot applications, you only have to not register the configuration outlined on this page, as it's not activated by default.
--
======

[#handler-timeouts]
== Handler timeouts

The method you define for Axon Framework to invoke is known as a message handler.

> These are the methods you annotate with `@CommandHandler`, `@EventHandler` or `@QueryHandler`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the methods you annotate with `@CommandHandler`, `@EventHandler`, `@QueryHandler`, or `@DeadlineHandler`.
```

> As of Axon Framework 4.11.0, you can set a timeout on all message handlers, depending on the message type.

Reviewer: I would omit the "4.11.0"-part since the documentation is already versioned.
```suggestion
You can set a timeout on all message handlers, with unique configuration per message type.
```

axon.timeout.handler.commands.warning-threshold-ms=5000
axon.timeout.handler.commands.warning-interval-ms=1000

# For @QueryHandler methods
axon.timeout.handler.queries.timeout-ms=20000
axon.timeout.handler.queries.warning-threshold-ms=5000
axon.timeout.handler.queries.warning-interval-ms=1000

# For @DeadlineHandler methods
axon.timeout.handler.deadlines.timeout-ms=20000
axon.timeout.handler.deadlines.warning-threshold-ms=5000
axon.timeout.handler.deadlines.warning-interval-ms=1000
----
--

Axon Configuration::
+
--
You can create a `ConfigurerModule` with the exact settings you would like.
Without Spring Boot, no default timeouts are applied.

[source,java]
----
public class MyTimeoutConfigurerModule implements ConfigurerModule {

    @Override
    public void configureModule(@NotNull Configurer configurer) {
        HandlerTimeoutConfiguration config = new HandlerTimeoutConfiguration();
        config.getEvents().setTimeoutMs(30000);
        // Set any timeouts and warning thresholds you would like here
        configurer.registerHandlerEnhancerDefinition(c -> new HandlerTimeoutHandlerEnhancerDefinition(config));
    }
}
----
--
======

> In addition, you can place a `@MessageHandlerTimeout` annotation on a message handler to override the default timeout, so that if you have a specific message handler that should have a different timeout, you can set it there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, you can place a `@MessageHandlerTimeout` annotation on a message handler to override the default timeout. This allows you to have a specific timeout for a message handler that that you know should be faster or slower than the global configuration.
```

[source,java]
----
class MyEventProcessor {
    @EventHandler
    @MessageHandlerTimeout(timeoutMs = 10000, warningThresholdMs = 5000, warningIntervalMs = 1000)
    public void handle(Object event)
    {
        Thread.sleep(19000);
    }
}
----

Setting `timeoutMs` on the global configuration and the annotation to `-1` will disable the timeout for that specific message handler.
Similarly, setting `warningThresholdMs` to `-1` on both will disable the warning messages for that message handler.

[#unit-of-work-timeouts]
== Unit of Work timeouts

> The `UnitOfWork` is the context in which one or more messages are processed.

Reviewer: Would be nice to do a link/reference to the unit of work page here I think!
